[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Admiral Richard Byrd appears
to have lost an epic battle
at the South Pole in 1947.
Stopping in Chile on his way
back to the United States
from Operation
High Jump, he made
several startling
statements concerning
new flying craft that could fly
from pole to pole in moments.
Once the Americans realized
that the Germans had
a secret base in Antarctica and
they also possessed new flying
craft and super
weapons, they decided
to create an alliance
with the Germans.
>> In 1947, Admiral Byrd took
a fleet of Navy ships down
to Antarctica to investigate
what the Germans were up to.
When he got there, they realized
they were up against something
much more sinister
than they realized.
>> Reinhard Gehlen was head
of Intelligence Armies East
for the Nazis.
What he did basically
was go into Russia
with the combat troops.
And as they took over larger
and larger swaths of Russia,
he picked up the
anti-communist underground
that was there and
then turned them
into his Gehlen Organization.
>> Reinhard Gehlen
was an SS general.
And he was actually head of
the Eastern forces of the SS.
And so he was an intelligence
expert on the Russians
and the Russian military
for the Germans.
At the end of World
War II, Reinhard Gehlen
was able to surrender to the
British and the Americans, who
gladly took him in as
an intelligence partner.
Reinhard Gehlen
was certainly one
of the most knowledgeable
people in the Third
Reich on intelligence
matters and involving,
of course, Germany, but
also the Russians as well.
>> And at the end of the war, he
had whole train loads of files
and information on
anti-communist activities
in Russia.
So he came to the Allies,
the Americans particularly,
and he said, look,
you guys are going
to be facing the Russians.
You don't know
anything about them.
They've been infiltrating
spies into the United States
since World War I, and said,
but I have all the information.
And if you will let me
provide the information,
I can give you the intelligence
you need to combat the Soviets.
And they did.
The deal was cut.
>> And the United States
government basically took
Gehlen and made him, really,
an OSS officer, and later,
as a CIA asset, in a sense.
>> He had two
qualifications at least.
One of them, he
said don't ask me
to provide the intelligence
that might harm
my own country, my fatherland.
OK?
Which shows he was an
unreconstructed Nazi.
OK, and two, he said if
there becomes a intelligence
service in Germany again, I
want to be the head of it.
And sure enough, he became head
of West German Intelligence.
Now the key to all
this in the meaning
is, is really pretty incredible.
Because what this means is that
after World War II, immediately
after World War II and
going into the Cold War,
the information we were
getting out of Russia
was coming from an
anti-communist underground,
filtered through a
Nazi organization.
Now no wonder we
had the Cold War.
No wonder we thought Russia was
trying to take over the world.
It's amazing.
>> It was through Reinhard
Gehlen that the Americans were
able to engineer what was
called Project Paperclip.
And that was to bring all
of these Nazi scientists,
particularly aerospace
and other technicians,
rocket scientists and stuff,
and people that had worked
at Peenemünde, including
Wernher von Braun,
to the United States.
>> What we know for sure is
at the end of the Second World
War, that the British,
the Americans,
and the Russians essentially
grabbed as much material
as they could.
And also, the
scientists, for example,
that the US had Operation
Paperclip, which
was designed to bring as many
Nazi scientists over to the US
to continue the rocket-based
programs as the White Sands
Missile Range, as
it's called today.
It used to be called the
White Sands Proving Grounds.
Many of the German
scientists were
sent there, where they
worked on, essentially,
the German V2 rocket.
It was just a continuation.
And of course, one of those
was Wernher von Braun,
who became one of the leading
figures in NASA later on.
So in other words, we've
got this paper trail,
and people trail as well,
going from Nazi Germany
through Paperclip right through
NASA through the '60s and '70s,
and all interconnected.
>> But one thing that
people have to realize, too,
is that as the war was
lost by the Germans,
the British and the Russians,
because of the vicious fighting
that they had been in, there
wasn't really a way that
the British, say, could bring
a bunch of Nazi scientists
to Britain and have them work
in the British space program.
That just wouldn't have
flown, shall we say.
But with the largesse
of the United States
and America's friendly
relationships,
really, with Germans
and other Europeans,
the United States
was able to bring
in these scientists,
these Nazi scientists,
without a lot of
hullabaloo or questioning.
And even within
the military, there
wasn't some big opposition to
bringing these Nazi scientists
to the US.
And that's what Paperclip
was really all about.
>> The people who were working
in the US defense community
thought that they had the
might and willpower to smash
the Germans.
But in fact, the
opposite took place.
The Germans were more
ruthless and more cunning.
And because all this was done
under the cloak of secrecy,
they could gain control
under the military industrial
complex.
And nobody out there in the open
would know anything about it.
>> What are they going to do?
Complain?
Oh, yeah, the Germans took
over all the secret stuff
that we never told
you that we had,
and there's nothing
you could do about it.
The Germans took over, and
it's remained classified up
until this day.
>> Most of the Nazi scientists
ended up in aerospace in one
way or another, even
working for NASA.
And they worked in New Mexico,
at Alamogordo and at Roswell.
Ultimately, in the
end, Wernher von Braun,
a Paperclip scientist,
became the head of NASA
and the director of it.
And Americans just accepted
that without question, really.
>> Near Roswell in New
Mexico, where German Paperclip
scientists were working on
top secret military aircraft
and rockets, an event
occurred on July 8,
1947 that would
change everything.
Rancher Mack Brazel, while
searching for missing cattle,
finds wreckage of a flying
craft strewn over a vast swath
of his property.
He also claimed to have seen
bodies of strange humanoids
that had been hurt in the crash.
What really happened at Roswell?
>> The question of what happened
at Roswell has been asked of me
since I became the first
civilian investigator
of the Roswell incident way
back in the '70s, mind you.
And I'm still convinced--
and there's a lot more work
now available than was then--
that an intelligently controlled
extraterrestrial spacecraft
crashed.
I won't say landed.
I say crashed.
It didn't just come down
gently, and let's see
where we are, folks,
or anything like that.
I believe there was
a midair collision.
In my first conversation
with Major Jesse Marcel,
who was the intelligence officer
at the base, Jesse told me--
I mean, he's talking about all
this strange wreckage spread
out over this area 3/4 of
a mile long, 1/4 mile wide.
He'd seen crashes in
the war in the Pacific.
Usually, there's a
big hole in the ground
where the airplane blows up.
He said he thought there had to
be a meteor explosion for two
reasons.
The wreckage was spread
over such a large area.
There, there was
nothing conventional,
no hole in the ground.
And how could it be
dispersed if you had a crash?
>> Many researchers believe
that an alien craft crashed
at Roswell.
But is there
another explanation?
>> When people look at the whole
Roswell crash and everything,
there's some serious problems
about that being some alien
or extraterrestrial craft.
First of all,
Roswell is not just
some ordinary town in America.
Roswell is an Air Force base.
It's Alamogordo.
It's the Trinity nuclear site.
It was the base of
the only atomic bomb
squadron in the world.
>> Some researchers have
suggested that the Roswell
incident may well have been
connected to some of these
early advanced
terrestrial technologies.
For example, Joseph Farrell--
I mean, he's looked into
that issue very deeply,
the idea that
perhaps what crashed
was a German device,
not necessarily
one that we captured.
And we were sort of
trying to understand it,
but possibly, the
last sort of vestiges,
almost like a final Third
Reich or a Fourth Reich that
was trying to build up.
And we kind of stumbled
onto the existence
of this new order, so to speak,
when the wreckage was found.
>> Roswell, it was really the
Area 51 of the '40s and early
'50s.
The idea that some craft
is crashing at Roswell--
and this is a town now
crawling with German aerospace
scientists and people who
are working with mercury.
There, they were
allegedly developing
flying saucers and the bell
and other things like that
in Germany, at the
end of the war.
And so the idea that they're
experimenting themselves
on these craft, it
makes complete sense.
And that some of their own
experimental craft would fail
and crash, as it happens when
you're experimenting with
anything, really-- and
aerospace particularly--
not everything is going to
work right the first time.
You're going to have crashes.
>> They all had a philosophical
and a psychological commitment
to it.
I mean, when you join the SS,
they tattooed your SS number
into your skin because you were
supposed to wear it forever.
I mean, they didn't
stop being Nazis.
>> I wrote a book on this
subject myself back in 2005
called "Body Snatchers
in the Desert,"
which also looked at the idea of
experiment sites in New Mexico
using human subjects in
high altitude experiments.
And I wouldn't be
at all surprised,
it wouldn't shock me at
all if Roswell did turn out
to be somebody's dirty
little secret, which,
in many respects, could be far
more dangerous, if you like,
and devastating than the
idea that aliens crashed.
The idea of using
human subjects possibly
against their will in test
flights of radical aircraft
and things like that, I
think that's something
that really would--
next to the UFO issue,
that's the one thing
I think, more than
any other, that
would guarantee total silence.
We can never let this
story out because of how it
would make certain people look.
Because Paperclip itself
was controversial enough,
doing a deal with
Nazi scientists.
But it was kind of like one
of those Faustian pacts,
doing a deal with the devil.
Because had we not done it,
had the Brits not done it,
the Russians would
have got all of them.
And they probably would have
got far more ahead of us
at a greater pace.
And for all we
know, 1953, 1954, we
could have seen
ourselves nuked and then
Russia running the planet today
or what would be left of it.
>> You would think, really,
that the Roswell crash--
and almost any UFO crash at that
time or in the United States
or perhaps even in
Mexico or something--
would really be a craft
that was being built perhaps
in Roswell or Alamogordo
or somewhere else.
>> When it comes to Roswell,
the big stumbling block in terms
of suggesting that it
was a terrestrial craft,
for a lot of people, at least,
is the nature of the bodies.
We know there was a
great deal of testing
of rocketry and strange
aircraft going on in New Mexico
in '45, '46, '47.
If somebody found,
like the rancher Mack
Brazel on the Foster
ranch in July '47,
if he found unusual wreckage,
then that could go either way.
It could be ours.
It could be theirs.
It could be some
Russian reconnaissance
plane that came down.
But the bodies are the one thing
that really kind of convinced
a lot of people that
what they were saying
were extraterrestrials.
Because people talked
about these small bodies
with large heads and
wearing sort of almost
like a flight suit
kind of thing.
And it's difficult to suggest
what they might have been,
had they not been so American
pilots or Russian pilots.
>> These people were ideologues
in that they were consumed
by their right--
their Nazi ideology and
their vision of a Fourth
Reich and their commitment
to eugenics and genocide
and the horrible
things that they did.
There was a guy who wrote
an article once in Sagan
in mid '70s.
And he had put into the
article a series of icons
that had been seen on the UFOs.
And if you look at
the iconography,
it's filled with
fascist iconography.
One of them is from a fascist
Italian aircraft squadron.
There's the [NON-ENGLISH].
It's like an F.
There's a symbol from the
British union of fascists.
I mean, it's just all over it.
We paint icons on
everything, right?
We have to categorize things,
and we put icons on them,
so that we understand
what they were.
And even chevrons, which
you would see on a Luftwaffe
aircraft to denote the rank
of the person flying it,
it's all there.
>> I think when we look
at the entire time frame
of '44, '45, through the late
'40s, early '50s, we can make
a very plausible case for
the hand of our technology.
And maybe some of the
stories about alien UFOs
were actually spread to
confuse the real story.
Everybody's chasing aliens,
and the real picture
gets buried even deeper.
One of the things I found
was that the Japanese
had done some sort of very
bizarre experiments, sort
of biological warfare
and chemical warfare,
not just on prisoners of war,
but on handicapped people,
including dwarves.
And also, the
Nazis, for example--
Josef Mengele, one of the
sort of most craziest Dr.
Frankenstein types
on the planet,
he had an obsession with
dwarves and dwarfism.
And there are a lot
of rumors and stories
about some of these
handicapped people,
including dwarves, being
taken from hospitals, asylums.
Because back then,
there was a great deal
of stigma concerning
people who, unfortunately,
had physical handicaps.
It's not like today.
They were sort of locked away.
It was the member of
the family nobody talks
about, that kind of thing.
And there are a lot
of rumors and stories
about people being
taken from such places
where they wouldn't be
missed because nobody cares
about them, and using some of
them, physically handicapped
people, including dwarves.
And that you only need one
of these craft to come down
or some sort of high altitude
balloon with a gondola.
And there's all
this sort of foil
from the balloon on the ground
and these small bodies strewn
around.
You can quite easily
see how, 30 years later,
when all the guys who are
involved are interviewed,
you can easily see how that
could mutate into a crashed UFO
legend.
They wouldn't be lying.
A lot of those guys may have
been on guard duty at the site.
They might have
been 30 feet away.
But they were close
enough to see the wreckage
and the material on the ground.
And they were close enough
to see these small bodies.
30 years later, when everybody
is talking about UFOs--
oh, well, that's what they were.
But they may not have been.
And again, something like that,
taking people from prisons,
from hospitals, that
would be, again,
a major sort of
black mark, if you
like, in the history
of the Cold War,
and again, another
valid reason to keep it
not just hidden, but bury it
just about as far as you can.
>> It was only once they went
to Antarctica and found what was
really going on that they
realized that World War II had
not ended, that it's still going
on and that they must prepare
to fight back.
So what did America do
to start fighting back?
They start building up the OSS.
And this is where you have the
Office of Strategic Services
that was later transformed
into the CIA, who
have a much better bureaucratic
and secret structure.
>> 1947 was a very
interesting year.
It was the year which gave
birth to the flying saucer, when
Kenneth Arnold had his encounter
with a squadron of flying
saucers, flying disks, over
Mount Rainier on June 24, 1947.
And the media immediately
latched onto this
all around the world.
Flying disks, as they
were also known back then,
and flying saucers
became big news.
Was it the Russians?
Is it us?
Are the Martians invaded?
These are all this kind
of things that came out.
And in no time at all, there
were UFO groups set up.
1947, coincidentally
or not, was also
the year we had the passing
of the National Security Act.
We had the first
Secretary of Defense,
which was James Forrestal.
The CIA was created in 1947.
And weird things are
flying around in the sky
throughout this entire era.
So I have to wonder and
wonder deeply if a lot of this
was in response to the
presence of the UFO phenomenon.
And there's a reason why I think
that could indeed be the case.
Because if you look at the
history of the phenomenon,
the UFO phenomenon in 1947
basically came out of nowhere.
The governments of
the day, regardless
whether extraterrestrial,
military, test vehicles,
or a combination of the
two, the governments
seemed totally puzzled
by it and concerned.
Because something's
flying around,
and we don't know what it is.
And so they'd never experienced
something like this before.
Because they're not
necessarily attacking us.
They're not helping us.
They're just skulking around,
and we cannot stop them.
We don't know who they are.
So I can easily see
how somebody said,
we've got to do something
about this quickly.
We need to set up programs.
We need to initiate a military
response if anything happens.
>> The American commitment to
this new alliance was shaky
at best.
There were many
insiders who disagreed
with Truman's decision to
bring into the United States
German scientists and
military personnel.
In the summer of 1952, the
residents of Washington, DC
watched helplessly
as a squadron of UFOs
flew over the most sensitive
areas of US government
facilities.
>> The great UFO flap of 1952, I
think that was somebody flexing
their muscle.
I think that
somebody had decided
that they needed to show the
US government that we're around
and we're upset.
Or we're around and we
have this capability.
So they sent a
squadron of Haunebu,
maybe, and buzzed
the US capital.
>> We can say that the recent
sightings are in no way
connected with any secret
developments by any agency
of the United States.
>> All of this sudden change
in '47, I think there's a very
strong current case can be
put forward that it was due
to the sudden presence
of the UFO phenomenon.
>> We can see that when one
investigates the Roswell crash,
we discover a labyrinth
of lies and deception.
Perhaps the truth
will never come out.
But what if the Germans
are more involved
in flying saucer stories than
we've been led to believe?
In 1961, an interracial
couple, Betty and Barney Hill,
had a strange occurrence.
Driving home late
one night, they
witnessed a UFO following them.
Later, they discovered that they
were missing many hours of time
during this late night drive.
Under hypnosis, the
couple began to recall
that the occupants of the
flying saucer had abducted them.
This story has become
legend in UFO circles.
Many researchers believe
aliens had abducted the couple.
But what if there's another
explanation for the Betty
and Barney Hill incident?
>> So there's a very interesting
thing about Betty and Barney
Hill.
It's not often discussed.
In a lot of ways, it's
actually suppressed,
I would suggest to you.
But if you actually
look at their testimony
and you see what they said
when they were regressed,
they talk about coming
aboard the ship.
You know, obviously, they
had seen the ship land.
Barney had gotten
out of the car.
He drew his 45 military
issue because he
had been in the army.
He fired at it, right?
And then somehow
they overwhelmed him.
And they got him aboard
the craft with his wife.
So they come aboard the ship.
And if you look at
the actual testimony,
they were greeted by
a redheaded Irishman.
And that redheaded Irishman
went around and introduced them
to a bunch of tall people that
they said Barney Hill thought
were speaking German.
And he described their uniform
as having silver piping
and peaked caps, which is
similar to an SS Panzer
uniform.
They had silver piping, and then
they would wear a peaked cap.
And he said that it
reminded him of Nazis.
There was, like, a
German Shepherd there
that was staying near
the redheaded Irishman.
Now what's
interesting about that
is that during World War II, the
Irish Republican Army, the IRA,
was actually partially
financed by the Germans.
The Nazis, the enemy of
my enemy is my friend,
so the Nazis and the IRA
both disliked England
with a passion.
So the Nazis had
equipment and training.
And they gave it to the IRA.
It's also not widely
known, but there
was a legion of Irish soldiers
that fought in the SS.
So there was definitely
communication there.
And if you're going
to leave town and go
somewhere else, other people
of your interest, right,
people who share your ideology
are going to come with you.
So I would expect that
if the Nazis did indeed
have a saucer program--
Haunebus are real--
and they left,
you would see Irish people,
you would see Italians,
you would see some Scandinavians
who had collaborated,
some French, the Vichy French.
You would see all these people.
And it's one of those
interesting things
that when you come
back away from it,
you start to see those people.
>> The Germans and the Americans
succeeded in their efforts
to make flying craft
that could go into space.
Perhaps they also used
aliens as a cover story
for their research.
But did they create a
breakaway civilization
with this advanced technology?
>> So when I think of
this particular group,
this black bunch of group that's
got access to what I believe is
extraterrestrial technology,
I look at them as a separate
civilization, one that is
broken away from our own,
hence the term
breakaway civilization.
>> Imagine what it would be
like for the Germans to develop
space travel.
They can take these
Haunebu craft to the moon,
maybe even to Mars,
where there appears
to be remnants of an
ancient civilization there.
They can then move into
some of these ancient sites,
pressurize them, move and
develop their technology,
free from any concern of attack.
And nobody can get to
them, as long as they
didn't develop space travel.
>> I would say the odds are
excellent that we're expanding
out into the solar system.
I think they started with
the moon because it's close.
I think after the moon,
they went to Mars.
There is plenty of
evidence of installations
on the moon and Mars.
Once you have the
capability to get to Mars,
you pretty much have the
capability to get to anywhere.
>> Even in Antarctica, the
Germans were still vulnerable.
When we went there with
Operation High Jump,
we got pushed back by
their Haunebu craft.
But the Germans realized that if
we developed our own spacecraft
technology, we could be
still a threat against them.
So they developed the
technology and decided
to move on to the
moon, maybe even
Mars, where they'd be
safe from prying eyes
to develop their programs and
projects away from any threat.
>> I think that they
are about to achieve,
if they had not
already achieved,
significant artificial
intelligence.
And I do believe that
they are much more
advanced with quantum computing
than we're led to believe.
>> I think that they
started to expand.
And I think that we can see
the leftover traces, as humans
were not very clean and subtle.
When you look at the
moon, you can see tracks
on the moon of
vehicles moving around.
In one case, you can
see the vehicle itself.
On the moon, you can
find installations
if you know where to look.
And I think that they executed
a program to cover it up,
whether it's the notion of
Kubrick faking the moon landing
or whether it's probes crashing
into Mars because we can't
set the altimeter correctly.
>> And so you would
work through--
have organizations like
NASA as your cover.
And then you would work
through the DOD, which
would also be your
cover for something
even more clandestine.
And I think this is
exactly what has happened.
>> So the Germans had the
advantage of being able
to continue their massive
military expansion far away
from Earth, where they can
develop their projects without
any interruption whatsoever.
>> The United States government
and military formed an alliance
with the Germans.
This gave them a huge
boost to the research
due to the vast resources
of the United States.
Through the 1950s and
1960s, great strides
were taken in this research.
There seemed to be a goal
of getting off the planet.
Perhaps they feared an
imminent catastrophe,
or maybe they just wanted
to see if they could do it.
We'll see in our next
episode that they
did succeed in
getting into space
through their discoveries of
various forms of anti-gravity.
[MUSIC PLAYING]